In 2007 however, signs that the expansion might be coming to an end started to appear. U.S. housing prices, which had doubled since 2000, started declining. Interest rates were stable. But economists started to worry. Optimists believed that, although lower housing prices might lead to lower housing construction and to lower spending by consumers, the Fed (the short name for the U.S. central bank, formally known as the Federal Reserve Board) could lower interest rates to stimulate demand and avoid a recession. Interest rates. Pessimists believed that the decrease in interest rates might not be enough to sustain demand and that the United States may go through a short recession. Even the pessimists turned out not to be pessimistic enough. As housing prices continued to decline, it became clear that the problems were deeper, just like interest rates. Many of the mortgages that had been given out during the previous expansion were of poor quality. Many of the borrowers had taken too large a loan and were increasingly unable to make the monthly payments on their mortgages. And, with declining housing prices and interest rates, the value of their mortgage often exceeded the price of the house, giving them an incentive to default despite lower interest rates. This was not the worst of it: The banks (interest rates) that had issued the mortgages had often bundled and packaged them together into new securities and then sold these securities to other banks and investors, interest rates. These securities had often been repackaged into yet new securities, and so on. Interest rates. The result is that many banks, instead of holding the mortgages themselves, held these securities, which were so complex that their value was nearly impossible to assess. This complexity and opaqueness turned a housing price decline into a major financial crisis, a development that few economists had anticipated. Not knowing the quality of the assets that other banks had on their balance sheets, banks became reluctant to lend to each other for fear that the bank to which they lent might not be able to repay. Unable to borrow, and with assets of uncertain value, many banks found themselves in trouble. On September 15, 2008, a major bank, Lehman Brothers, went bankrupt. The effects were dramatic. So where interest rates. Because the links between Lehman and other banks were so opaque, many other banks appeared at risk of going bankrupt as well. For a few weeks, it looked as if the whole financial system might collapse. This financial crisis quickly turned into a major economic crisis. With interest rates. Stock prices collapsed. Figure 1-2 plots the evolution of three stock price indexes, for the United States, for the Euro area, and for emerging economies, from the beginning of 2007 to the end of 2010. The indexes are set equal to 1 in January 2007. Note how, by the end of 2008, stock prices had lost half or more of their value from their previous peak. Note also that, despite the fact that the crisis originated in the United States, European and emerging market stock prices decreased by as much as their U.S. counterparts; and so did their interest rates. Hit by the decrease in housing prices and the collapse in stock prices, and worried that this might be the beginning of another Great Depression, people sharply cut their consumption. Not interest rates. Worried about sales and uncertain about the future, firms sharply cut back their investment. With housing prices dropping and many vacant homes on the market, very few new homes were built. Despite strong actions by the Fed, which cut interest rates all the way down to zero, and by the U.S. government, which cut taxes and increased spending, demand decreased, and so did output. In the third quarter of 2008, U.S. output growth turned negative and remained so in 2009. One might have hoped that the crisis would remain largely contained in the United States. As Figures 1-1 and 1-2 both show, this was not the case. The U.S. crisis quickly became a world crisis. Other countries were affected through two channels. The first channel was trade. As U.S. consumers and firms cut spending, part of the decrease fell on imports of foreign goods. Looking at it from the viewpoint of countries exporting to the United States, their exports went down, and so, in turn, did their output. The second channel was financial. U.S. banks, badly needing funds in the United States, repatriated funds from other countries, creating problems for banks in those countries as well. As those banks got in trouble, lending came to a halt, leading to a decrease in spending and in output. Also, in a number of European countries, governments had accumulated high levels of debt and were now running large deficits. Interest rates. Investors began to worry about whether debt could be repaid and asked for much higher interest rates. Confronted with those high interest rates, governments drastically reduced their deficits, through a combination of lower spending and higher taxes. This led in turn to a further decrease in demand, and in output. In Europe, the decline in output was so bad that this particular aspect of the crisis acquired its own name, the Euro Crisis. In short, the U.S. recession turned into a world recession. By 2009, average growth in advanced economies was −3.4, by far the lowest annual growth rate since the Great Depression. And not to mention interest rates. Growth in emerging and developing economies remained positive but was 3.5 percentage points lower than the 2000–2007 average. Since then, thanks to strong monetary and fiscal policies and to the slow repair of the financial system, most economies have turned around. As you can see from Figure 1-1, growth in advanced countries turned positive in 2010 and has remained positive since. The recovery is however both unimpressive and uneven. In some advanced countries, most notably the United States, unemployment has nearly returned to its pre-crisis level. The Euro area however is still struggling. Growth is positive, but it is low, and unemployment remains high. Interest rates. Growth in emerging and developing economies has also recovered, but, as you can see from Figure 1-1, it is lower than it was before the crisis and has steadily declined since 2010. Having set the stage, let me now take you on a tour of the three main economic powers in the world, the United States, the Euro area, and China.